Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're going
to make the transition from geometry involving
points and lines to a geometry involving circles
and our main aim will be to introduce a proper
definition for the notion of a circle there are
some obvious candidates we could say that a circle
is just a round shape but that's a little bit
too vague we can say that a circle is a curve
traced out by a compass one of those tools used
by the ancient Greeks you put one end there and
then you swing the other end around and it traces
out a circle that's a little bit too physical and
not mathematical enough a very common definition
is that a circle is a set of points which are a
distance R from a fixed point O so here is a point
all with coordinates a B and we're looking at all
those points X whose distance from always exactly
R now there's two major difficulties with this
definition one is that it involves an infinite
set of points which in fact it does not exist
the more carefully you think about what you
actually mean by this infinite set the more
fuzzy and vague it actually becomes secondly we
will see that when we go to higher geometry to
more elaborate curves that there will be a good
reason why this is not an appropriate definition
another reasonable candidate is as simply the
equation expressed by this X so here we have
not distance but quadrants which is the square
of distance so X minus a squared plus y minus B
squared that's the quadrants from a point XY to
the point O and we're saying that the quadrants
is equal to R squared that defines the circle and
we could say that's the equation of the circle in
the sense that any point X Y that satisfies that
equation lies on the circle so a very good idea
is to say that a circle is this equation and
we're gonna do something that's very similar
to that except that we don't want to really
focus on x and y the x and y are not really
essential aspects of this thing because it's
a little bit arbitrary we could also use Zed
and W or R and s or some other variables it's
actually the coefficients of the X and y that
are important when we expand out the equation for
a circle that we had we see we get this equation
here involving x squared minus 2x a a squared
y squared minus 2y B plus B squared equals R
squared that's a special case of this general
equation of degree 2 which we will see later
on represents a conic it can also represent the
hyperbola and ellipse or parabola or some other
configurations as well the special case of the
circle is characterized by the D and the F terms
the coefficients of x squared + y squared
being equal and there being no XY term so
that coefficient a is 0 and that motivates our
definition of a circle a circle is nothing but
a proportion of the form 1 - 0 - 1 2 - 2 a 2 -
2 B - C in other words it's the six coefficients
that are appearing in this formulation here
when we look at the equation of the circle a
proportion is all that's needed because when
we multiply all those numbers by a fixed scalar
the equation doesn't change this defines a new
mathematical object which we call a circle and
we also say that the equation of the circle is
what we get when we expand it out in terms of
X squares and Y Squared's it's this thing here
and this is just the equation that explains to
us when a point XY lies on the curve C let's have
a look at some examples first let's observe that
the equation of the circle that we had can be
rewritten in the more standard form X minus a
squared plus y minus B squared equals some number
K not hard to see that the a and the B and the
number K are uniquely determined because they can
be read off from those three last coefficients in
our proportion so we could say that the circle
is indexed by the pair a B which is called the
center of the circle and the number K which
is called the quadrants of the circle so some
examples of circles where I write the equation
rather than the proportion of six things here's
the equation x squared plus y squared equals one
which represents the unit circle whose Center is
that at the origin 0 0 here is a circle x squared
plus y squared equals 2 which is the circle also
of center is 0 0 but with quadrants 2 here's a
circle x squared plus y squared equals minus 5
also has center 0 0 and the quadrants is minus
5 this is a circle that doesn't have any points
lying on it because over the rational numbers
squares are always positive so it's not possible
for x squared plus y squared equals minus 5 but
nevertheless it's very important to observe that
this is still a circle by our definition and it's
going to be important in later developments that
it is and another example X minus 1 squared plus
y minus 2 squared equals 23 that's a circle with
Center one two quadrants 23 it's less obvious in
this case that there are in fact no points that
lie on that circle no rational points that's going
to be a number theoretical aspect of the subject
that's going to come up in our next video but for
now let's just observe that this thing is still an
example of a circle now let's have a look at how
the notion of a circle relates to the notion of a
line suppose we have a line L given by R - s - t
RS Mt some rational numbers we say that that line
meets the circle C with centre a B and quadrants
K precisely when there is a point X Y which lies
on both the and the circle so this pair X of
Y has to satisfy first of all the equation of
the line and the equation of the circle in this
picture here for example we've got two circles
there's a circle see with equation x squared plus
y squared equals 2 which is Center is 0 0 and goes
to the point 1 1 1 minus 1 another example is the
circle D whose equation is X minus 4 squared plus
y minus 1 squared equals 4 which has Center for 1
right there now I've shown you in red some points
that lie on the circle however it's not always the
case that an arbitrary line that appears to cross
that circle actually meets the circle for example
if you look at the x axis here and circle numbers
see if Y is equal to 0 then x squared equals
2 has no solutions over the rational numbers
there is no rational number as the pythagoreans
realized that satisfies the equation X grade
equals 2 that's telling us that geometrically
this line does not meet that circle despite the
appearances and I indicate that with these little
empty squares here these little empty squares are
points where the circle does not actually meet a
line that goes through that seems to go through
it so that line there does not actually meet
the circle so when a line and a circle meet is
a rather subtle number theoretical business and
it's a theorem that any line L and any circle C
meet in either 0 1 or 2 points and to prove that
we're going to require a little bit of algebra
using quadratic equations so that will come a
little bit later circles are rather interesting
number theoretical objects and it's wrong to
think of all circles as sort of being more or
less all the same there are no more the same than
stars in the sky are the same in our next video
we're going to look what points lie on circles so
we're to talk about parametrizing the points that
lie on a circle I hope you'll join me for that
I'm Norman Wildberger and thanks for listening